Well,
what is your name? Arnulfa Martinez de Medina.
Again, Arnulfa Martinez de Medina. And where were
you born? In the city of Camargo. In 1995. 1995.
1895.
Yes, 895. And when did you come here to Texas? We
came in 1913. Well, tell
me, please, these things about the story of your
life in the days when you were a girl in Camargo.
When you were a child in Comarga, tell me about your
life. For example, what was your father's name? My
father's name was Romaldo Martínez and my
mother's name was Arnulfa
Olivares.
He died in 1898.
Yes, he died, my father. My mother had four
children, his children, well married. And then he
got married again in 1900, with another man named
Macedonio Carrera. And he had many children, I
still have my brothers. And what else do I want?
What kind of work did your father have? My father
was a farmer. He was a capitalist. That's what they
say in my register. My father was a capitalist. He
lived in his capital. That's what they say in my
register, where he registered
me with his mother. And the second wife of your
mother? The second, yes, she lived with the
capital. Also? Also. Capital of what? Small
cattle, they call it cabras. Oh, cabras. Cabras.
Did they have a lot of land? Well, maybe they did, so
they had a lot of capital. It was very extensive,
the Mexican land. In wintertime, the cattlemen
would go to the mountains where there was a refuge
for the animals, far away. What kind of house did
you have?
A good house. Yes. With adobe. So we used adobe.
Yes. From Soquete. The painting to make the
houses. Very good house we had. With patio? Yes.
With fruit trees? Yes. In the city of Camargo? In
the city of Camargo. And how many people lived
there in the city of Camargo in those days? Many,
many. And then, for what reason did your family
come to Atenas? Why did we come? Yes. Because of the
war in the Camargo. Well, tell me about the war.
Well, I told them. I told the people that they were
very messy and that they did many bad things. And
some of them would do them, maybe. But my parents,
out of fear, dad, my brothers Martínez, who were
two men, they were already men, not men, but young
boys. And out of fear that they were going to go to
war, they came here with all the cattle that was
left. And we left the house and everything there.
And we came here. How many people came? A lot.
Almost all of Camargo came. Almost all of the town?
Yes. After that, some came, and others have come
now from out there, foreign. We tell them that they
are from outside, foreign. But some returned to
their homes. We didn't, because Dad didn't leave.
Because here he thought about living, making a
living. I bought some mules and a guayín, I bought a
car and a bunch of beasts so that my brothers and
sisters
could work. And then they all grew up, my brothers
and sisters. I have a brother who has a very strong
store, very big, very good prices, with good
possessions. My brothers and sisters are not very
popular. I still have three brothers and sisters,
men and two women. And we all have good houses to
live in. We are not under huts that serve us. We are
under... I am a mother, under a good environment.
Why didn't you go back to Camargo after the
revolution? Because they started working here
and we made a living here. I got married here
because I was the first and we all got married, we
all got married. What year did you get married? I
got married in 1918. During the revolution? No, I
think it was over. There were a lot of foreign
troops and they were very bad. The troops
were bad. My father didn't want to come here. My
father paid the expense. I didn't know my father. I
can't remember him. But my father didn't want to
come here. He had a lot of corn. And they had stored
it in a room to use it. And the bad revolutionaries
came, I told them. Because some came and others
didn't. And they never left the Pacific. And I
didn't want to say that... Well, the little man,
right? And then they made him run over, or they ran
over him, and he said, I don't have any more wine
left. And we thought, the revolution lasted 14
years. 14 years? 14 years it lasted. Oh, how hard.
That's why we made deposits here, and of housing,
and of everything, because that's how we liked it.
We didn't like to go from house to land. Yes.
Well,
What
type of history
are you mainly
interested in?
Well, I'm interested mainly in... Are you a
history major? No. After
my grandfather died, he was coming to practice.
Uh-huh. And that grandfather and father, when
they came over, they always had the intention to go
back. They had no intention to stay here. But they
never went back, you know, because everybody was
born here and grew up here. They didn't want to go
back. Uh-huh. Well, she just told me that one
reason that they didn't go back is that, you know,
they all got married here. And then she married an
American citizen, my father. And at that time, I
don't know if you were familiar with, the law was
that if a woman married a foreigner, she would
become a citizen of that country. It used to be that
they changed the women's living order. They
changed that. So she became an American citizen By
marriage. By just marriage. And she didn't know
until about 20 or 30 years later that she was in a
pregnancy. . Actually, on my father's side,
they were all He probably was born here in this
state in 1865. And after
the Mexican-American War, they took all this
land. Why don't you leave your chair up close so I
can pick you up? And the people, you know, these
people that had lived here even before they were,
they were part of Mexico. And the United States
took all this land. And these people remain here
anyway. My father grew up in this area, even though
it was U.S. territory. But the people that lived
here at that time, they still used Mexican
currency. It was just like living in Mexico as far
as they were concerned. So there were lots of
connections between, was there a lot of contact
back and forth across the river? There was no such
thing as immigration. Immigration officers.
See,
the wealth at that time was to have goats or sheep.
They were pretty well off if you had that capital.
And he crossed with everything. And that's what
she's saying. He had to get Oh, when they crossed
during the revolution? That's right. They
brought everything. Was it easy to get the
permission? ¿Estaba fácil para obtener esta
permisión de aduanas? ¿De cruzar con todos los
animales? Sí, sí. Eso era muy, muy gratis todo. No
cobraron. Ah, no problema. No. Sí. They
were
very well off, you know, in that type of standard.
My grandfather, my real grandfather, my real one,
because she remarried. Right. And was very well to
do, you know. He developed quite a bit of capital
when he died. It's funny because at that time, if
you owned a horse and had a gun, you were pretty
well-to-do. Just like having a Cadillac
nowadays. You got a car. When did your family move
into this part of Texas? You say your father was
born in 1865? In Tabasco. My grandfather was born
in 1865. No, your grandfather was from Rancho El
Azucar. No, but he was an American citizen. He was
an American citizen. He was born in Yes, but in
1865, when did the United States take over this
land? 1845. 1845. Was he born in 1865 or was he born
in 1840?
See, he died. My father was born in 1883. And his
father died when he was a little boy. So that means
he was in his mid-40s. And my father was... So that
was 1893. And he was about 45. Actually, he
probably was born closer to that 1845 era. So it's
possible. See, when the Guadalupe Hidalgo Treaty
said that if you lived in this area that they had
taken over, you could either remain here and
become an American citizen and retain all rights,
or you could go back to Mexico. You had a choice. So I
think that's probably what happened. They just
stayed here. And by virtue of taking over this
land, you became an American citizen. I was
wondering when his forebearers, they must have
been among the fairly early colonists of the
region. Very, very early. His father, my... Your
great-grandfather. Do you know about your
great-grandfather? We know his name. What was his
name? He was probably more Indian than Spanish.
What was his name? Benigno. No, Benigno was the
father of Apollonio. My great-grandfather was
named Apollonio Medina. Apollonio Medina.
Apollonio. Do you remember his name? And
my grandfather was Benigno, which I had a brother.
What makes you think he was more Indian than
Spanish? Because my father used to say that he
remembered him as just like an Indian, the way that
he was, barefooted and dressed in long hair. So he
would say he was just like an Indian.
And then my grandfather became very well-to-do
because they were cattlemen. This is on your
father's side. My father's side. They were
raising cattle. Now, on your mother's side, they
were raising goats. Right. Right. And they were
all, from my grandfather and all his
brother-in-laws, they were all cattlemen. They
used to, my grandfather used to, when they'd have
these drives to Kansas, they'd bring beef on them.
He used to be a trail driver. That was his job. Tell
me something. Before that, before the Kansas
drives, did they ever drive the cattle south to
Mexico? Back to the markets? Well, I'll bet you
anything they did, because I've got some
documentation on cattle drives as far south as San
Luis Potosi going back to the 18th century. This is
what's interesting is, you know, I wonder, where
did my grandfather learn this trade? He learned
this trade because they were driving, from 1750
on, they were driving cattle Five and six hundred
miles south of the Perilla Market in central
Mexico. I've just found this out, and I'm really
excited about it. All the brothers-in-law of my
father were experts. They were experts as far as
that business was concerned. So they had to learn
it, like you say. It's obvious that that's how it
is. They already knew how to do it. They didn't
learn it here. And the Anglos didn't invent it. No.
It was already going on, and so really what seems to
have happened is the direction of the drives
changed. And then eventually they took over. It's
just like
on that Guadalupe Treaty, we seem to have
forgotten it. I live in Virginia. There's not very
many Spanish-speaking people down there. Not
very many. Very few. According to the treaties,
you know, these people that remain here, it said
that they could retain, if they had land, if they
had land, they could retain title to their land.
They could retain their own language and their own
customs and their own religion. This was, you
know, guaranteed. And, of course, see, now we run
into the problem that, like, when I went to school
here, it was against regulations to speak
Spanish. Against regulations? In the school
grounds. And it's understandable why. I can
understand why. But it's still against what was
first understood. Well, tell me, have they
brought in the bilingual education program here
where you should be learning both languages from
first grade on? Here in Texas, I'm not very
familiar, but I just read a book recently. The
Constitution of New Mexico was set up where the
school systems were to be set up bilingual and to be
taught by people that could speak both languages,
which of course wasn't done. That's why, you know
who Reyes Tijerina is? He's been raised in hell,
but then he's in jail. But, of course, he wants his
land back. He says it's theirs. But he ain't gonna
get it back. He says that... The Jews got their land
back in Palestine. This is my brother-in-law. I'm
Mary Lee Nolan from College Station. How's
everything up there? Fine, fine. You can say that
here. Over there? Yes, it's hot up there, but it's
just as hot here. It's hotter here because of the
dust. He says that the Jews got back their land.
They felt that they'd been there for centuries and
centuries, and there's no law to take it away from
them. And we supported him. Eric said, we should
get the land back. And he said, well, why can't we
get ours?
He probably, I'd love to see his flames. He says
he's had them. I've never seen them. He may have
them because there was a lot of slicky business.
Yeah, with the Santa Fe ring and all that. He's
mainly in New Mexico. He's very radical. He's an
extremist, I think. But sometimes, you know,
that's what he thinks. If you have people that are
too peaceful, you ain't going to get anything
done. That's what he thought. I've got a friend
here, and I
haven't seen him in years, because I haven't lived
here in 10 years, that his grandparents, all his
grandparents, I don't remember which, they came
from Spain originally. They had a grant from the
king of Spain, giving them, I've forgotten how
many, thousands of acres, 25, 30,000, 50,000. So
when this happened, So when it changed, the land
changed, the U.S. government was good enough
about it that they retained title to their land.
They didn't lose it. Like in California, all these
people lost it. They had the Russian, they didn't
have it in Texas. So they still have about 25,000
acres right now. They still retain their title.
But it'd be interesting, I don't know how much he
knows to see how and where his grandparents were,
his great-grandparents when this changes. A lot
of the people I know in Zapata and Webb counties,
most of the titles were respected. Now, I don't
know how it was down here and on down toward
Brownsville, but I've looked at a lot of the court
records in Webb and Zapata. Now, a lot of people,
one thing that happened to the lands is that the
titles would come into controversy and lawyers
would clear it up and get a good copy. for clearing
the tides,
but the tides
were ultimately respected in
that area. And where were they from? Where did they
come from? From Camargo. They were from Camargo
too? Yes. And they came here during the
revolution? Yes. So they lived, it was the same
thing, they just crossed the river. And why did
they have their lands here? Because they lived in
Camargo. Actually it was all Mexico. They had an
agreement, the lands from here, They used to bring
their cows across the river, depending
on where it was better grazed. So they actually, on
your father's side, they lived in Camargo part of
the time and raised their cattle. Let me see. Papá
nunca vivió en Camargo, ¿no? ¿Tu papá? Ellos
siempre vivieron acá en La Joya. Sí, tu papá no
vivió nunca aquí. Ni nosotros hasta que no nos
venimos. See, actually, my father always was on
this side of the river. But on your mother's side,
they would bring their cattle back and forth
across the river. Do you have land here on this side
as well? Yes, also. A lot of land? A lot, a lot of
things. How many hectares? How many acres? No, I
can't tell you. It's just that there were a lot. A
lot? I can't tell you because my people... They
didn't work with them. My family wasn't working
with them. They worked on their own. Only on their
own. Your father? Your father was Martínez,
right? Yes, that's why I called him Martínez. And
he wasn't from Camargo originally. No. Your
father was. Your father was? The one who was was my
grandfather, Miguel Martínez. He was from China.
From China. My grandfather. Your grandfather.
Let's see. No, my grandfather was Miguel. He was my
grandfather. mis abuelos it goes so far back it's
just
like uh first cousin she's from mexico and they
used to own a lot of land they used to have you know
acres and acres and when all this changed and all
this you know some people took over anyway she was
Just recently, she was trying to get the land back,
but we didn't have any records. She went through
all the records in Mexico. This is land in Mexico
she was trying to get back. Yeah, well, the
revolution kind of took care of a lot of that. And
they just couldn't get the land back.
I'd like to know more about how the decision was
made to actually move over here to this side of the
border. ¿Quién decidió? ¿Papá no nos decidió
venirse para acá? Pues el temor nos hizo venirnos.
¿Pero quién hizo la decisión? Pues papá y mamá.
Pues papá y mamá. En la noche llegaron los primeros
tropas. And they were destroying, shooting, and
scaring people in the streets. And they took the
horses too, right? Yes, the horses, they took
everything. Animals, I don't tell you, corn,
everything that was destroyed, they threw
everything at the animals, just like that. And all
the things from your house too? They would take
everything. No, no, the houses. They wouldn't
take the houses? Well, yes, but later, yes. Well,
yes, later, yes. That's why they left. Because the
other day we woke up here. It was a complete
evacuation
because my grandmother's brothers, they all
lived here. They were olivares. And this was in
1913.
That was in 1913? 1913? 1913, in May. In May of 1913?
Yes, in May of 1913. And who are the bad troops from?
From Carranza? From all of them. Some came and
others went with other names and other names like
that. Many, many, and it's not important from
whom. And in Camargo, are there sides in the
revolution? How do you say it? How would you say,
were they on either side? Did they have any
political... I know what you're trying to say. I
think I know the answer, but I don't know. It's
something that's been a question in my mind
always. Because I used to tell my grandfather, if I
were a baby, I wouldn't have left. I would have
fought there. I would have made my stand. Who would
you have fought for? For myself, for my land. For
your own land, right there. But you would have been
a non-combatant. Right, I would have lost. In
defense of, you wouldn't have been, you'd have
lost. But I wouldn't have died, but I wouldn't have
died. There were many names of those who came. And
you, I mean, the whole revolution is your
strength. And you didn't have any interest in who
won? No. See, this is what I never could
understand, but I can't. I've got an idea that
you've got a group of people that are isolated.
They're isolated from politics. They're very
poor, very poor people. The only thing they had...
The president. The president. Yes, the president
of the nation. Francisco Madero. Francisco
Madero. His people. No, in Mexico. In Mexico. The
president of Mexico and the city of Mexico. Yes,
but the people of your people, do they like Madero?
No, they didn't take decisions. No, they didn't
have political things. They didn't have meetings
or elections. No, there are no elections? No. Was
he a mayor of Camargo? Well, not in Camargo, he was
from Mexico. When you lived there? In Camargo,
yes. How did he become mayor? I don't know. Didn't
they vote? Yes, before the war. Before the war,
they did vote. They all voted. Yes, before the war.
Before the war. But when there was war, there was no
peace, there was no tranquility, there was
nothing. That's why we didn't go. Because there
was no government. There was no government. And
there were some people who took care of us. In the
Camargo presidency, But my, this other, like I
say, my grandfather, but he's not really my
grandfather, that's the only person that I knew,
because her father died when she was young, so I was
at home. He used to say that... He used to say
that... He had his, you know, you had your horse
there and the soldiers would come and they would
take him. So, he was the only one from his family.
Yes. Pancho Villa? Ah, yes, yes. But is it after
your family came here? No, we were here. We only had
the newspapers. They ask me about the newspapers.
60 years ago. How did they protect you here? Who
protected you on this side of the river? You had
American soldiers. So who protected you? No, by
law. Which law? The Cote. If the soldiers could get
to Camargo, why didn't they get here? They came
here once, but with permission. on the 21st of
March, because they were afraid, because they
were afraid that they would be thrown on top of
them. And then, how do you call the one in charge of
the court? The judge? No, no, the one in charge of
the court is Álvarez. What does he do? He's the head
of the whole town. He was a warlord, and he ordered
the families not to go out. And that they were
allowed to go in because they were being thrown on
us and they were killing us. And that's how they did
it. They came in with a lot of peace, with things of
gender, loaded and giving to the people. But we
didn't go out.
And another thing
was
that
These people didn't have any weapons, I say. No,
they didn't have any weapons. No, they didn't have
any weapons, I say. No, they didn't have any
weapons, I say. No, they didn't have any weapons, I
say. No, they didn't have any weapons, I say. No,
they didn't have any weapons, I say. And that's how
all the noble, good people got together, because
they were afraid. Yes. Fear, danger, danger. And
the women, especially, or the men too? The men too.
They were all afraid. My father had the bonfire on
for the cattle, and he left it on. He let it go. He got
angry. Because there were a lot of people without
law. They didn't have law. Because all the old
people were prisoners. There in Camargo they took
a boy and we never saw him again.
And they killed him there in Camargo. Those
things. Are there people who live in Camargo now?
Yes, a lot of people. It's peaceful, you have your
law. Did those people return to Camargo? No. How
did they get up again? Some people returned and
others... They came from other places. Now they
have a lot of people. Not yet. Now there is a lot of
people and a lot of order and everything. Cases
happen wherever they want, but the people are with
their order, with their law. Yes. Well, in which
country do you think life is better, here or in
Mexico now? Well, here. Here? Why? Because here
there is a lot of work. It's a difficult
question. This, of course, is a richer country. We
can't deny that.
It's more advanced
politically.
Yes, women too. You'd rather live in Mexico. Why?
Because I like the way of life. It's very nice out
there in Monterrey, in Mexico, Guadalajara. It's
more relaxed. No, it's very nice. My daughters are
going to walk in the shadows. Because I have three
daughters who are teachers. You? Married women.
This is one of them. And I have another one who lives
in Macaulay. Here I have two. How many children do
you have? I had 11, thank you. 11? All of them were
born. 11 children. And 3 are teachers. I have
Marcos, Arturo, Ella, Marta.
Marta is 4. 4 teachers. And the others, what kind of
work? I'm a Carly Boomerang technician. I'm in the
Air Force. The other brothers, what happened to
them, one was killed in World War II at 22 years old.
The other one was killed in an accident when he was
27. He was the man. And my oldest brother. My oldest
brother didn't go to college. He was also inducted
in World War II. He lost his left arm. Y mis hijos
vivimos bien cuando menos. No somos ricos, pero
vivimos bien. I went for three years and I quit. You
went to college for three years. Pues las otras
también fueron al colegio, pero no alcanzaron.
And the other one, my other sister did go for two or
three years and she got married. Now, what is your
name? Alfredo. Alfredo. And what are you? You're
one of the younger. I'm the youngest. You're the
youngest. You're the baby of the family. Él es de la
barrica. That one? Yes.
Well, and your husband? What kind of work did he
have? Well, he was a manual laborer. But he had
land, right? We had cows and we had goats. Yes, and
land of your own? Of my own. And the children, all my
children went to school, well, all of them. The one
who didn't take out his griffin was because he
didn't want to. But we all live well, we never live
badly. Thank God, I say, thank God. She just told
you that she did it. Thank God. I am very... I
believe a lot in God. I believe a lot in God. He has
led me through mysterious paths that I did not
think about. I have a master's son. I did not think
about it. But one of them began to think. And we
continued. I have one who is a teacher, who is in
McAllen. They were putting her to study so that she
could calm down for a while. To write, and there was
a little girl. And she asked me for a pencil
sharpener and I gave it to her. Because it was her,
so that she was happy. And my father came, who
raised me, my stepfather. And he said, and my
daughter, what are you going to do? I, dad, no, no.
Maita, teacher. I said, Maita. For what reason did
your husband and I have this, how do you say,
this...
Because he didn't know how to read. And I don't know
how to read. Yes. How old were you? How old were you
when you went to school? Well, I think I didn't
complete it. I should learn to read and write. In
Camargo. Read and write, because in the Methodist
Church we read and write. And I didn't like it when I
entered the religion, I didn't like to do it unless
I knew how to read. When did you learn to write? In
school. At what age? 16 or 17 years old. Ah, not in
Camargo. In Camargo, yes. Oh, 16 years. And it
ended at 18? Yes, at 18. But I kept writing and
reading books. I liked reading books. I liked
reading. I liked reading. And I like it. Yes? Yes.
And for this reason, these things were important
to you all your life. And your husband also went to
school? No, he didn't. He didn't? Precisely, this
is what took us to school, the children, what he
didn't know. He said, when we got married, we're
not going to leave our children without knowing.
We have to look for them. They go to school. They
liked school. But because in those years, people
were very decisive. Yes. They didn't like school.
Well, my brothers didn't want, they didn't accept
that my daughter went to school. Oh, yes. Yes, they
did. This is difficult to understand. No. This is
difficult to understand, and it still is in
Mexico. In Mexico, higher learning is strictly
cultural. You go to school, it's like a luxury.
Culture is a luxury. In this country, as far as I'm
concerned, you can make a living without having to
go to school, as long as you know the basics. The
hard earning is just for culture. In this country,
of course, it's the worst. You have to have this
education to get a job. But my husband told his
children that he had lost a lot of good jobs because
he didn't know how to read or write or count. And
that led him to have an idea to educate his
children. But we didn't think we were going to have
teachers. No, I didn't think about it in those
years. Education wasn't worth anything. No? No.
There was no education, so it wasn't worth
anything. I was in a ranch and I took out a bus full of
votes so that I could take my children to school and
others. The whole ranch fell into the school. But I
looked for votes. Yes? Yes. So that they would give
me the bus to take them abroad. That's what I did.
The interest. I knew that
my children knew about it. He was very loving, and
he was just like me. We thought the same, I think. He
was my son, he was old and his father died when he got
married. He was never talking, fighting, saying
bad words. He was the one who said it. We talked at
the table and everything we were going to do, very
peaceful. They were all
Catholics.
In Mexico, everybody's
a Catholic.
She
thought
she had changed.
Oh.
And he had children and even met a grandson. And his
wife and I were there when Kirby died, one of the
veterans. And we came home at midnight, we took
care of everything, very happy. Only with God and
Christ. When they were there, they also had
another turning point. When we had World War II,
when World War II began, the boys were old enough to
go to war. They were all different. They almost
went back to Mexico. But the boys didn't go. Did you
prefer to go back to Mexico? I did want to go because
I didn't want them to go to war. Because of the war.
Because of the war. Yeah. Well, a mother. My
children were just starting to live and I was going
to take them with me, as they told me. They all went
to war. Yes, all of your children? Yes, five of
them. My mother is my third daughter. The sense of
loyalty and being born here, and it has been an
important factor in staying here, that is on the
part of the children. But you say you would... I
would pray that I would go to Mexico. Why don't you?
I couldn't get a job. If I didn't get a job, a good
job, a good job, I'd go back. Where would you go in
Mexico? Anywhere. But I prefer southern Mexico
than southern Mexico. You get a little altitude
and the weather gets a little better. Much nicer.
Where have you been in Mexico? Mexico City and
around
Mexico City. Bueno, en los días de la Revolución,
¿hay
problemas aquí en la frontera? Antre los tropas.
Después de su familia fueron por aquí. ¿Hay
problemas con tropas? ¿Cuáles tropas? ¿De
México? De México, sí. De la religión. In other
words, was there any fighting back and forth
across the border or raiding or anything like
that? They only had that one incident. Do you know
when Fort Randall was set up? No, I don't. Because
the reason for that port was to protect the... The
borders. The borders. The American border towns.
I don't know what year it was set up. Because Pacho
Villa crossed in advance. It crossed with the
United States. But that was the detail about 1916
or 1917. 16, I think. 1916, about three years after
they made the reintegration. What was the reason?
Huh? I'm sorry. Tell me again. I'm thirsty. She's
completely against drinking. In fact, she
wouldn't allow anybody in here. I'm the only one
that she has allowed to drink.